---
tags: vaje, kirv, signatures
hackmd: https://hackmd.io/o1tJDJoZRcmRIJAMgqMFyw
plugins: mathjax
---
# Cryptography and computer security - Tutorial 22.12.2020

---

## Digital signatures

### "Textbook" RSA signature

* Key generation: same as for RSA encryption
* Signing: <i>$\sigma = m^d \bmod{n}$</i>
* Verifying: <i>$m \stackrel{?}{\equiv} \sigma^e \pmod{n}$</i>

### ElGamal signature

* Key generation:
  - Choose a large prime <i>$p$</i> and <i>$\alpha \in \mathbb{Z}_p^*$</i> such that <i>$\langle \alpha \rangle = \mathbb{Z}_p^*$</i>
  - Choose the **private key** <i>$a \stackrel{R}{\in} \mathbb{Z}_{p-1} \setminus \lbrace 0 \rbrace$</i>
  - Compute <i>$\beta = \alpha^a \bmod{p}$</i>
  - Publish <i>$(p, \alpha, \beta)$</i> as the **public key**

* Signing $m \in \mathbb{Z}_{p-1}$:
  - Choose <i>$k \stackrel{R}{\in} \mathbb{Z}_{p-1} \setminus \lbrace 0 \rbrace$</i>
  - Compute <i>$\gamma = \alpha^k \bmod{p}$</i> and <i>$\delta = (m - a \gamma) k^{-1} \bmod{(p-1)}$</i>
  - If <i>$\gamma \equiv 0 \pmod{p-1}$</i> or <i>$\delta = 0$</i>, start over by choosing a new <i>$k$</i>
  - The **signature** is <i>$\sigma = (\gamma, \delta)$</i>

* Verifying a signature <i>$\sigma = (\gamma, \delta) \in \mathbb{Z}_p^* \times \mathbb{Z}_{p-1}$</i> of a message <i>$m \in \mathbb{Z}_{p-1}$</i>:
  - Check that <i>$\alpha^m \equiv \beta^\gamma \gamma^\delta \pmod{p}$</i>

### DSA signature

* Key generation:
  - Choose a 1024-bit prime <i>$p$</i> and <i>$\alpha \in \mathbb{Z}_p^*$</i> of order <i>$q$</i> a 160-bit prime
  - Choose the **private key** <i>$a \stackrel{R}{\in} \mathbb{Z}_q \setminus \lbrace 0 \rbrace$</i>
  - Compute <i>$\beta = \alpha^a \bmod{p}$</i>
  - Publish <i>$(p, q, \alpha, \beta)$</i> as the **public key**

* Signing $m \in \mathbb{Z}_q$:
  - Choose <i>$k \stackrel{R}{\in} \mathbb{Z}_q \setminus \lbrace 0 \rbrace$</i>
  - Compute <i>$\gamma = (\alpha^k \bmod{p}) \bmod{q}$</i> and <i>$\delta = (m + a \gamma) k^{-1} \bmod{q}$</i>
  - If <i>$\gamma = 0$</i> or <i>$\delta = 0$</i>, start over by choosing a new <i>$k$</i>
  - The **signature** is <i>$\sigma = (\gamma, \delta)$</i>

* Verifying a signature <i>$\sigma = (\gamma, \delta) \in (\mathbb{Z}_q)^*$</i> of a message <i>$m \in \mathbb{Z}_q$</i>:
  - Verify that <i>$\gamma, \delta \ne 0$</i>
  - Compute $\theta = \delta^{-1} \bmod{q}$
  - Check that <i>$((\alpha^m \beta^\gamma)^\theta \bmod{p}) \bmod{q} = \gamma$</i>

---

### Attacks on digital signatures

* **Universal forgery**: an adversary can forge a valid signature <i>$\sigma$</i> for any given message <i>$m$</i>.
* **Selective forgery**: an adversary can forge a valid signature <i>$\sigma$</i> for a message <i>$m$</i> chosen by a challenger.
* **Existential forgery**: an adversary can forge a valid message-signature pair <i>$(m, \sigma)$</i> which had not been previously produced by a legitimate signer.

### Attack models

* **Key-only attack**: the adversary only has access to the public key.
* **Known-message attack**: the adversary has access to a number of valid message-signature pairs <i>$(m_i, \sigma_i)$</i>.
* **Chosen-message attack**: the attacker can obtain valid signatures <i>$\sigma_i$</i> for messages <i>$m_i$</i> of his own choice.

---

### Exercise 1

Show that the textbook RSA signature scheme is existentially forgeable under a key-only attack and a known-message attack, and universally forgeable under a chosen-message attack. Describe the easiest way to prevent these attacks.

---

### Exercise 2 - the reblocking problem

Suppose that Alice wants to send Bob a signed and encrypted message <i>$m$</i>. She will use RSA for both signing and encrypting. She first uses her private key <i>$(n_A, d_A)$</i> to obtain the signature <i>$s = m^{d_A} \bmod{n_A}$</i>, and then uses Bob's public key <i>$(n_B, e_B)$</i> to obtain the ciphertext <i>$c = s^{e_B} \bmod{n_B}$</i>. She sends <i>$c$</i> to Bob, who then decrypts it with his private key <i>$(n_B, d_B)$</i> to obtain <i>$s' = c^{d_B} \bmod{n_B}$</i>, and finally recovers the message <i>$m' = s'^{e_A} \bmod{n_A}$</i> using Alice's public key <i>$(n_A, e_A)$</i>.

Assuming that <i>$m$</i> has been chosen uniformly at random from <i>$\mathbb{Z}_{n_A}$</i>, what is the probability that <i>$m \ne m'$</i> - i.e., that Bob does not decrypt the message correctly? Compute the probability for <i>$n_A = 62894113$</i> and <i>$n_B = 55465219$</i>. How could this problem be mitigated?

---

### Exercise 3

Describe why the value <i>$\gamma \bmod{p-1}$</i> in the ElGamal signature scheme should not be 
<i>$0$</i>.

---

### Exercise 4

Compare the ElGamal and DSA signature schemes. Does the difference in efficiency affect the security of DSA?